[TEP-0142] Enable Step Reusability (#1065)
tektoncd/community: teps/0142-enable-step-reusability.md

---

> status: implementable

Author: Sounds great! I will add that in.

> status: implementable

Author: I added sections on `API version and feature` and `Validation of StepActions and Steps`. As far as how `Step` results are implemented, I'll be making changes to the `Results` section in the doc (I've responded to your comments there so PTAL). 

Thanks!

    - [CI/CD Systems based on Tekton](#cicd-systems-based-on-tekton)
      - [1.Nubank Workflows](#1-nubank-workflows)
      - [2.JenkinsX](#2-jenkinsx) 
    - [Comparable CI/CD Systems](#comparable-cicd-systems)
      - [1.Github Actions](#1-github-actions)
- [Proposal](#proposal) 
  - [StepAction CRD](#stepaction-crd)
  - [Referenced Steps](#referenced-steps)
    - [Params](#params)
    - [Results](#results)
    - [Workspaces](#workspaces)
    - [VolumeMounts](#volumemounts)
    - [SecurityContext](#securitycontext)
  - [Inlined Steps](#inlined-steps)
- [Secure Software Supply Chain](#secure-software-supply-chain)
  - [Trusted Steps](#trusted-steps)
  - [Provenance](#provenance)
- [Possible Names](#possible-names)
- [Future Work](#future-work)
  - [Sidecar](#sidecar)
  - [Tekton v2](#tekton-v2)
  - [Tooling](#tooling)
  - [Conditional Execution of Steps](#conditional-execution-of-steps)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [StepCRD](#stepcrd)
  - [ActionCRD](#actioncrd)
  - [Tasks in Tasks](#tasks-in-tasks)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This TEP proposes to introduce a `StepAction` CRD as the smallest, scriptable and reusable unit of work in Tekton. 

> The reusable units of work in Tekton, `Tasks`, currently cannot natively execute in the same environment with a shared file system. As such, Tekton users have to choose between reusability and performance. This design doc revisits the components and architecture of Tekton to both enable reusability and optimize performance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimum reusable unit of work in Tekton, `Task`, currently cannot natively execute in isolation without relying on a shared file system. As such, Tekton users/authors have to compromise reusability for security, and performance. This design doc revisits the components and architecture of Tekton CRDs to both enable secure reusable objects and optimize performance. 
```

### Background

> `Tasks` are the reusable unit of work in Tekton. A `Task` is made up of a sequence of `Steps`. A `Task` and its `Steps` execute in Kubernetes as a `Pod` made up of a sequence of `Containers`. The `Steps` of a `Task` have access to shared storage and resources, such as `Parameters` and `Workspaces`. `Tasks` are combined in `Pipelines` which are graphs where each node represents a `Task`. The `Tasks` in a `Pipeline` execute in separate `Pods`, thus they need to share data via a `Workspace` that is generally backed by a `Persistent Volume`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Tasks` are the reusable unit of work in Tekton. A `Task` is made up of a sequence of `Steps`. A `Task` and its `Steps` execute in Kubernetes as a `Pod` made up of a sequence of `Containers`. The `Steps` of a `Task` have access to ephemeral shared storage such as `emptyDir`. `Tasks` are combined in `Pipelines` which are graphs where each node represents a `Task`. The `Tasks` in a `Pipeline` execute in separate `Pods`, thus they need to share data via a `Workspace` that is generally backed by a `volume`.
```

When users need to combine `Steps` to execute together, they are forced to choose between reusability and performance. If they prioritize performance over reusability, they would copy and paste the `Steps` of the `Tasks` into a new `Task` to execute in one `Pod` with a shared file system. If they prioritize reusability over performance, they would execute the `Tasks` with single `Steps` in separate `Pods` without a shared file system.

### Usability
It is complex and challenging to move data between reusable units of work because they don’t share a filesystem. This is a shared pain point with various efforts to address it [directly](#related-work) in Tekton, [indirectly](#cicd-systems-based-on-tekton) on systems built on Tekton, and now in a dedicated working group. 

### Performance

This section outlines the main takeaways from the performance costs [measurements](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ifY4dzNCstiTklYEBWMbyz5TeGoXzalYT7zEr5iWJ8Q/edit).

#### Pod Overhead

> The overhead of starting a `Pod` is ~4s, as measured in our experiments with very simple `Pods`. While a 4s `Pod` overhead seems like a small fraction of the execution time of a typical CI/CD `Pipeline`, these performance costs add up. The `Pod` overhead increases linearly with an increasing number of sequential `Tasks`, for example a `Pipeline` with 5 sequential `Tasks` would have a `Pod` overhead of ~20s.

Reviewer 2: Some project have targets for CI jobs to run within a minute or so, several seconds already have a big impact there.

![pod overhead](images/0142-pod-overhead.png)

#### Workspace Overhead

> As measured in out experiments, while the overhead of mounting an `EmptyDir Volume` is negligible, the overhead of mounting a `Persistent Volume` is ~10s for the first `Task` that uses it then becomes negligible for future `Tasks` that use it as long as they are on the same node.

Reviewer 2: The overhead may very well be cloud specific, but indeed I doubt it could go below the ~10s.
Note that the PVC overhead could run in parallel to the Pod setup.

<table>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: step1
spec:
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo "I am expendable"
```
</td>
<td rowspan=2>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  steps:
    - name: s1
      stepRef:
        name: step1
    - name: s2
      stepRef:
        name: step2
```
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: step2
spec:
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo "I am special"
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

A `Task` can refer to the `StepAction` from the cluster or fetch it from remote sources via a resolver. 

<table>
<tr>
<td>StepAction from cluster</td>
<td>StepAction from Git repository</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  steps:
    - name: s1
      stepRef:
        name: step1
```
</td>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  steps:
    - name: s1
      stepRef:
        resolver: git
        params:
          - name: url

>             value: https://...

Reviewer 3: Even though I agree, I see this as orthogonal from this proposal. It is consistent with the "resolvers" syntax today. We should aim to enhance / simplify that, for all resolvers usage at once.

>             value: https://...

Author: I agree with @vdemeester. I think we could consider shortening the resolver syntax across the board separately.  

I think this also goes to @dibyom's point at the API WG related to conformance spec. "Keep the name in the Conformance API but let the resolvers interpret the names themselves".

>             value: https://...

Reviewer 4: yeah I'd really like to simplify the current resolver syntax with something similar to `stepRef:  name:version@resolver`

>             value: https://...

Author: Agreed! Resolving for now.

      stepRef:
        name: step1
      onError: continue
    - name: s2
      stepRef:
        name: step2
      computeResources:
        requests:
          memory: 1Gi
          cpu: 500m
        limits:
          memory: 2Gi
          cpu: 800m
```
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: step2
spec:
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo "I am special"
  securityContext:
    privileged: true
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

#### Params
If a `StepAction` needs `Parameters`, they need to be declared so that they can be provided by the `Task` author. Without declaring `Parameters`, the `Task` author would have had to go through the `StepAction` specification to decipher what is needed. A `Task` should declare the `Parameters` that the underlying `Step` needs so that they can be provided by the `TaskRun` or the `Pipeline`. 
<table>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
# This is how a step author would 
# declare the params that it needs.
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: foo
      type: string
      description: “This is a param”
      default: bar
  image: alpine
  script: |

>     echo $(params.foo)

Author: Thanks for bringing that up. I didn't really know that. May be because we use examples in our codebase that are filled with using params directly inside scripts. A lot of my knowledge on the uses is from those examples. I wonder if others are in the same boat as well. 

I think we should really have guidelines/best practices doc that lays all this out. 

Will fix!

>     echo $(params.foo)

Reviewer 2: @chitrangpatel we have guidance in the [catalog docs](https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/main/recommendations.md#dont-use-interpolation-in-scripts-or-string-arguments) and now [this TEP](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1077) too. 

I know we have this still in many examples, which we should fix (even though we still need to keep it somewhere for testing purposes), but I would like to avoid adding more examples. Could you please fix the example in the TEP?

>     echo $(params.foo)

Author: Fixed!

```
</td>
<td>

```yaml
# This is how a task author would 
# provide the params that the step needs.
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  params:
    - name: foo
      type: string
      description: “This is a param”
      default: bar
  steps:
    - name: step1
      stepRef: 
        name: myStep
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

Referencing `StepAction` in a `Task` could create name conflicts that need to be resolved by the `Task` author. For example, if “step1” needs a `Parameter` called “url” and “step2” also needs a `Parameter` called “url” but they are actually meant for different purposes, the `Task` author needs to be able to pass in different values to both these `Parameters`.

> All inlined `Steps` and `Sidecars` in a `Task` can access all the `Parameters` and reference them in their work. This behavior is still intact. However, `Parameters` need to be passed explicitly to a referenced `Step`. While users only need to provide values when there are name conflicts (since a `Step` has access to all params of a `Task`) we start by explicitly providing all the required parameters to the `StepAction` and will be enforced during validation. To prevent increased verbosity of the specifications, we can invoke parameter propagation in future work. 

Author: I like the idea of introducing propagated params from the start. That way, users will just need to provide params where they need to resolve conflicts.

WDYT @jerop ?

> All inlined `Steps` and `Sidecars` in a `Task` can access all the `Parameters` and reference them in their work. This behavior is still intact. However, `Parameters` need to be passed explicitly to a referenced `Step`. While users only need to provide values when there are name conflicts (since a `Step` has access to all params of a `Task`) we start by explicitly providing all the required parameters to the `StepAction` and will be enforced during validation. To prevent increased verbosity of the specifications, we can invoke parameter propagation in future work. 

Author: On second thoughts, I think we rejected propagated params for referenced Tasks and Pipelines because the usage of those parameters in the referenced Tasks/Pipelines is opaque to the users providing them. We only propagated params for inlined specification. For the same reason, I think we should not propagate params here since all the StepActions are referenced. 

To reduce scope here, we can revisit propagation of params and workspaces in referenced specification as a part of future work if needed. WDYT?

> All inlined `Steps` and `Sidecars` in a `Task` can access all the `Parameters` and reference them in their work. This behavior is still intact. However, `Parameters` need to be passed explicitly to a referenced `Step`. While users only need to provide values when there are name conflicts (since a `Step` has access to all params of a `Task`) we start by explicitly providing all the required parameters to the `StepAction` and will be enforced during validation. To prevent increased verbosity of the specifications, we can invoke parameter propagation in future work. 

Author: As @wlynch pointed out as well that things like Context variables will also likely help reduce the verbosity since StepActions could potentially use them directly.

I think there was general agreement that we can scope this as future work.

Resolving this for now.

<table>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
# This is how a step author would
# declare the params that it needs.
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: url
      description: “This is a param”
      default: bar
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo $(params.url)

```
</td>
<td rowspan=2>

```yaml
# This is how a task author would provide 
# the params that the step needs.

apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  params:
    - name: url1

>     - name: param2

Reviewer: typo: s/param2/url2/

  steps:
    - name: step1
      stepRef: 
        name: myStep
      params:
        - name: url
          value: url1
    - name: step2
      stepRef:
        name: myOtherStep
      params:
        - name: url
          value: url2
```
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: url
      description: “Another param”
      default: baz
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo $(params.url)

```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

> #### Results

Author: A step can write results to `/tekton/results` using `$(results.<resultName>)` or to `/tekton/steps/<stepName>/results/<resultName>` using  `$(step.results.<resultName>)`. The second path is critical for `StepActions` if they want to avoid potential name conflicts with other steps and accidentally overwrite that step.

In the previous comment, and following discussions in the Data interfaces WG meeting:

```
For now, a good compromise might be to make the step results available to Task results by default with the expectation that if there are name conflicts then users have to explicitly request them using the above suggested syntax. If users don't resolve the names then they will be overwritten by the following step.

So if an author uses two StepActions in a task that produce a result called "digest" and a third StepAction that produces a result called "foo" then "foo" would be propagated to the Task by default and the Task author would only need to explicitly call out the result "digest" using the above syntax.

This would be similar to params where instead of explicitly declaring all params, they only provide params that have name conflicts.
```

> #### Results

Author: Please re-read the Results section. I've updated it based on discussions in several comment threads and discussions in the Data interfaces WG.

A referenced `StepAction` needs to declare if it produces a `Result` so that `Task` authors know that they can reference it without having to drill into the `StepAction` specification. 

If multiple `StepActions` produce the different `Results` under the same name then to ensure that they are not overwritten, the `Task` needs to be able to capture them under different names. In order to capture these at the task level, we need to: 

> 1. Introduce a field to [TaskResults](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/445734d92807a80158b4b7af605d768c647fdb3d/pkg/apis/pipeline/v1/result_types.go#L19-L49) called `Value` like we do for [PipelineResults](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/445734d92807a80158b4b7af605d768c647fdb3d/pkg/apis/pipeline/v1/pipeline_types.go#L129C1-L144C2). (Note this would not be a backwards incompatible change. We would be making an additive change here.)

Author: Completely agreed! I think we can visit this as future work (i.e. `promoted results`). 

For now, a good compromise might be to make the step results available to Task results by default with the expectation that if there are name conflicts then users have to explicitly request them using the above suggested syntax. If users don't resolve the names then they will be overwritten by the following step. 

So if an author uses two StepActions in a task that produce a result called "digest" and a third StepAction that produces a result called "foo" then "foo" would be propagated to the Task by default and the Task author would only need to explicitly call out the result "digest" using the above syntax. 

This would be similar to params where instead of explicitly declaring all params, they only provide params that have name conflicts.

> 1. Introduce a field to [TaskResults](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/445734d92807a80158b4b7af605d768c647fdb3d/pkg/apis/pipeline/v1/result_types.go#L19-L49) called `Value` like we do for [PipelineResults](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/445734d92807a80158b4b7af605d768c647fdb3d/pkg/apis/pipeline/v1/pipeline_types.go#L129C1-L144C2). (Note this would not be a backwards incompatible change. We would be making an additive change here.)

Reviewer 2: Sounds good

A `Task` could be using multiple `Steps` that require the same `VolumeMount`. When inlining the `Steps`, the `Task` author has the complete context and so this is easy for the author to avoid name clashes and confusion. However, `StepActions` could choose names that conflict with other `StepActions` because they are written in for general use cases. Because of this, we propose parameterizing the name of the `VolumeMount` when requested in a `StepAction`. This is something that can also be enforced during validation. 

The `Task` authors can provide the underlying `Volume` (`emptyDir`, `Secret` etc.)

<table>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: registryConfig
  volumeMounts:
    - name: $(params.registryConfig)
       mountPath: /registry-config
  image: ...
  script: ...
```
</td>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: task-name
spec:

>   volume:

Author: This was based on a lot of catalog Tasks that rely on volumeMounts. I think they are not deprecated but there was an effort trying to deprecate it. I don't think we got around to it. @dibyom had very good reasons for bringing this into `StepActions` so I want to let him explain why.

>   volume:

Reviewer 4: This is a bit tricky - there are some volume/volumeMount use cases that are not covered by Workspaces: https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0112-replace-volumes-with-workspaces.md#volume-use-cases-supported-by-workspaces

We had considered adding functionality to workspaces for some of these use cases but decided not to do so given that the alternatives would be duplicating functionality or clunkier to use.

Without the `volumeMount` field, `StepAction` authors lose the ability to control where exactly a volume/workspace/disk/filesystem is mounted which may be necessary for the step to function correctly.  (The actual volume/disk that is mounted could come from a Pod volume or a workspace). 

For example, the cache needs to be mounted at `/workspace/.m2` for https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/537265eb583836f596f2a3a3ab3e3b904ae24013/task/jib-maven/0.4/jib-maven.yaml#L70-L73 and the certs need to be mounted at `/certs/client` for https://github.com/tektoncd/catalog/blob/537265eb583836f596f2a3a3ab3e3b904ae24013/task/docker-build/0.1/docker-build.yaml#L67-L69

>   volume:

Reviewer 2: If a tool does not allow specifying the path to a folder they need it could be argued that's an issue in the tool. That said, I agree that, as Tekton, we may need to help users cope with those cases. 
I don't think we should promote a syntax where the `Task` author needs to use `volume` instead of `workspace` because that brings a runtime value (the actual name of the volume) into the authoring-time space.

If a `StepAction` needs a volume to be mounted at a special place, it could expose a parameter that provides the name of the volume, so that the step may additionally mount that volume on a different path. 

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: registryConfigVolume
      description: the name of the volume with the registry configuration
  volumeMounts:
    - name: $(params.registryConfigVolume)
      mountPath: /registry-config
  image: ...
  script: ...
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: task-name
spec:
  workspaces:
  - name: registry-config
  steps:
  - name: myStep
    ref:
       name:  myStep
     params:
     - name: registryConfigVolume
       value: $(workspaces.registry-config.volume)
```

In short, I'm ok with the `volumeMounts` field in steps as long as we don't suggest it be used together with `volume` in `Task`. Another possibility, for a more concise and specific syntax, could be:

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  volumeMounts:
    - name: registryConfig
      description: the name of the volume with the registry configuration
      mountPath: /registry-config
  image: ...
  script: ...
---
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: task-name
spec:
  workspaces:
  - name: registry-config
  steps:
  - name: myStep
    ref:
       name:  myStep
     volumeMounts:
     - name: registryConfig
       volume: $(workspaces.registry-config.volume)
```

>   volume:

Author: Thanks @afrittoli I think in the example, I basically did a similar thing as your first approach. We parametrize the name of the volume. 

We can enforce that it is parametrized in a StepAction during validation. That way, we can make sure that the Task author can provide the appropriate tool (workspace or volume) during runtime.  I will capture this in the TEP.

>   volume:

Author: I updated the example to reflect your concerns and also noted that we **will** enforce that the name of the volumeMount is parametrized so that the Task can provide what it wants to during runtime.

>   volume:

Reviewer 2: Thanks for updating the example

2. To retain backwards compatibility with the fact that users don’t need to provide a value field under normal circumstances, we could continue to surface the results to the `Task`.

`Step` authors should be able to:
1. reference result paths via: `$(step.results.resultName.path)` , *NOT* `$(results.resultName.path)` since `StepAction` are a new addition (backwards compatibility is not required here).
    a .Internally, 
      i. `$(step.results.resultName.path) = /tekton/steps/<step-name>/results/resultName`
`Task` authors should be able to:
1. fetch results from underlying `Steps` using  `$(step.stepName.results.resultName)`.
2. For backwards compatibility, they can write inlined `Steps` with results written to `$(results.resultName.path)`. These results will automatically be surfaced to the `Task` by the entrypointer.

> 3. However, if they write inlined `Steps` where `Results` are written to `$(step.results.resultName.path)` they need to fetch the `Step` `Results` using `$(step.stepName.results.resultName)`.

Author: Fixed. I updated the text. It is only needed when there are potential name conflicts. E.g. if two step actions produce results with the same name then the Task author can use this syntax to attach the result to another name at the Task level.

Say, step1 produces a result called `digest`.
`step2` also produces a result called `digest` and `url`

In this case, the task author needs to distinguish between step1's `digest` and step2's. There they can use:

```
results:
  - name: digest1
    value: $(step.step1.results.digest)
  - name: digest2
    value: $(step.step2.results.digest)
```

Failure to do so will cause both the results to be automatically surfaced to the Task where the second one i.e. Step2's result will overwrite Step1's.

The result `url` from `Step2` will be automatically surfaced to the Task level. But since there is no other step in the Task producing a result called `url`, the Task author does not need to resolve anything.

<table>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
# This is how a step author would 
# declare the results that it needs.
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myStep
spec:
  results:
    - name: digest
      description: “One result”
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo DIGEST >> $(step.results.digest.path)
```
</td>
<td rowspan=2>

```yaml
# This is how a task author would 
# provide the results that the step needs.
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  results:
    - name: digest1
      value: $(steps.step1.results.digest)
    - name: digest2
      value: $(steps.step2.results.digest)
    - name: normalResult
      description: “Normal result.”#Automatically sent 
# to the TaskRun CRD. No need to fetch it via 
#values since it was written to the old path.
  steps:
    - name: step1
      ref: 

>         name: myStep

Author: Great question. We could make the name of the referenced StepAction, the name of the step but that is prone to errors with something like remote resolution. Imagine if two step actions in a task were being referenced from different remote locations but had the same name for the action. 

Therefore, we should make the name field mandatory when referencing Steps. I will add it in the appropriate section.

>         name: myStep

Reviewer 2: My proposal was to make it mandatory for referenced steps only, which would be backwards compatible, but I'm also fine with requiring it only when a result from a step is referenced, as in that case the task author will experience the need for a name. 

Could you add a note about this in the TEP?

>         name: myStep

Author: Captured.

After the `StepAction's` spec is fetched, it will efectively convert the `Step` referencing a `StepAction` to an inlined `Step` in the status of the `TaskRun`. We do a similar thing when we resolve `PipelinRef` and `TaskRef`. After this point, the remainder of the validation happens as if it was an inlined `Step` (i.e. no additional validation is required). 

#### Managing API and feature versions
The `StepAction` CRD will be introduced under `v1alpha1` API version and promoted to `v1beta1` and finally to `v1` following the [API compatibility policy](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/api_compatibility_policy.md).

At the same time, we also need to introduce a feature flag for enabling referencing of `StepActions` from `Steps`. [TEP-0138](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0138-decouple-api-and-feature-versioning.md) introduced per-feature-flags. Following that, we will introduce a feature flag called `enable-step-actions`, dedicated for this feature. 

> Since both the CRD and the feature flag, are being introduced at the same time, we propose syncing the advancement of the feature flag `enable-step-actions` and the API stability level for `StepActions`.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @chitrangpatel. As I understand, this means that:
- when `enable-step-actions` is alpha, the `v1` Task will be able to use `v1alpha1.StepActions`
- when `enable-step-actions` is beta, the `v1` Task will be able to use `v1beta1.StepActions`. Will support for the `v1alpha1.StepActions` cease immediately? Will we provide a conversion webhook/logic?
- when `enable-step-actions` is stable, the `v1` Task will be able to use `v1.StepActions`. How will we handle support for `v1beta1.StepAction`?

Author: Thanks for the detailed questions. It helped me dig into more details. I updated it. PTAL. I think we will have a deprecation window between each promotion so that users can make the transition from `v1alpha1 --> v1beta1 --> v1`. And in the interim, we will have web hook conversion to convert between the two so that the TaskRun controller can work with only one of the two types.

  script: |
    echo "I am expendable"

```
</td>
<td rowspan=2>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1
kind: Task
metadata:
  name: ci-t
spec:
  steps:
    - name: s1
      ref:
        name: step1
      onError: continue
    - name: s2
      ref:
        name: step2
      computeResources:
        requests:
          memory: 1Gi
          cpu: 500m
        limits:
          memory: 2Gi
          cpu: 800m
```
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: step2
spec:
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo "I am special"
  securityContext:
    privileged: true
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

#### Remote Resolution
When it comes to remote resolution, here is the general flow. 

The pipelines controller creates a Resolution request CRD. The resolvers fetch the resource from the remote locations (`git/artifacthub/oci bundle`) and update the CRD with the raw content (i.e. unmarshalled bytes). The `resolvers` are not aware of the exact Struct that the content needs to resolve to.
The updated to the CRD triggers another reconcile loop and the pipelines controller then accesses the raw content and un-marshalls it to `Pipeline/Task/StepAction`.

> This was demonstrated for the `git` resolver in the `StepAction` [POC](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/7124). Assuming that the other resolvers are similar, we do not need to update the resolvers to resolve `StepActions`.

Author: @vdemeester PTAL at this. It tries to address your feedback from [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1z2ME1o_XHvqv6cVEeElljvqVqHV8-XwtXdTkNklFU_8/edit?disco=AAAA7J6Zrh8).

Reviewer 3: Yes. There is no change to do on the resolver's code from pipeline, etc.. But a resolver could definitely only resolve `Pipeline` or `Task` (and refuse resolving any other type requested). In any case, if need be, we'll modify those, it's not a problem 😉

### Background

`Tasks` are the reusable unit of work in Tekton. A `Task` is made up of a sequence of `Steps`. A `Task` and its `Steps` execute in Kubernetes as a `Pod` made up of a sequence of `Containers`. The `Steps` of a `Task` have access to shared storage and resources, such as `Parameters` and `Workspaces`. `Tasks` are combined in `Pipelines` which are graphs where each node represents a `Task`. The `Tasks` in a `Pipeline` execute in separate `Pods`, thus they need to share data via a `Workspace` that is generally backed by a `Persistent Volume`.

![Components](images/0142-components.png)

## Motivation

`Steps` are the smallest unit of work but they aren’t reusable because they are specified in `Tasks`. `Task` authors end up writing a lot of general purpose `Tasks` with single `Step` to make them reusable for most users. In fact, about 77% of `Tasks` in the Tekton Catalog have a single `Step` only. However, these reusable units cannot execute in a shared context – `Pod`. 

> When users need to combine `Steps` to execute together, they are forced to choose between reusability and performance. If they prioritize performance over reusability, they would copy and paste the `Steps` of the `Tasks` into a new `Task` to execute in one `Pod` with a shared file system. If they prioritize reusability over performance, they would execute the `Tasks` with single `Steps` in separate `Pods` without a shared file system.

Reviewer 5: It's true for most of the cases but there exists a significant number of use cases where performance with step CRD would degrade.  These use cases cater to running Taskrun in parallel.

Author: Absolutely! I don't think here, were are suggesting one or the other. A Step is incomplete without a Task since it cannot be executed on its own. It's still a part of the TaskRun so the user has full capability to execute a Task with a single step. It's just that this Step does not have to be inlined. It would be nice if it could be reused.

Reviewer: Running one huge `pod` with a series of containers running in sequence might not gain as much performance as expected.

For a common CI/CD use case, a simple application repo, git-clone can be the first step followed by building an image from that repo.

And a pipeline building many jar files as part of a single build process might be expensive and not feasible for a single pod.

Author: Agreed that there are many cases where running sequentially degrades performance. 

The point here is that the moment a user wants to combine steps that they reuse, they have to choose between `copy-and-pasting` (the usability factor) or write them as tasks (to get that reusability) and put those tasks in sequence (which hinders performance compared to two steps in sequence). This statement is targeting simple use-cases where users are really forced to write a pipeline where it makes more sense to simply write a Task.

Reviewer 2: NIT: The "When users need to combine `Steps` to execute together" part clarifies that this is not for all use cases, but maybe it could be made a bit more explicit. 

There are many different use cases, depending on this shape, duration and data I/O of each workload it makes more sense to spread them around in different pods and pay the pod setup cost and data I/O to share data, or keep them together in a pod, and pay the reusability, duration and scalability cost that goes with it. This proposal helps reducing the "reusability" cost from the second option, which I think is a great advancement for Tekton.

If they copy and paste the `Steps` of the `Tasks` into a single `Task` to execute in one `Pod`, then the source code will be fetched to a local disk which will be used to build the image. This is performant but hurts reusability.

![clone build push task](images/0142-clone-build-push-task.png)

If they execute the `Tasks` in separate `Pods`, the source code will be fetched to a persistent disk which will be used to build the image. This maintains the well-factored reuse but incurs performance costs.

![clone build push pipeline](images/0142-clone-build-push-pipeline.png)

### Use Cases

1. As a Platform Engineer, I want to take the work that the `Steps` in my `Tasks` perform and make them easily usable and reusable by other teams.
2. As a DevOps Engineer, I want to optimize the performance of Tekton workloads by reducing the execution time and resource utilization.
3. As a Security Engineer, I want developers to use ephemeral local volumes to share data between reusable units of work to limit external influence workloads. 

> 

Reviewer 5: Also, sometimes single step `Task` hinders the reusability for QE.
This use-case involves requiring any scaffolding or services to fully run E2E. 
```
We need to manually define these services using sidecars in Tekton, such as:

sidecars:
  - image: $(params.IMAGE)
     name: postgres
     script: |
       #! /bin/bash
       source /home/postgres/run_postgres.sh;
  - image: $(params.IMAGE)
     name: keycloak
  #etc...
```

But we need to do that for different e2e test Tasks. The alternative is to write multiple steps which reduces the usability of Tasks.

### Related Work

#### Prior Art

##### 1. TaskGroup Custom Task

> OpenShift has an experimental feature [TaskGroup](https://github.com/openshift-pipelines/tekton-task-group/tree/f43d027f4d5928e34d099b98870b17dbbffde65a) `Custom Task` that merges multiple `Tasks` into one `Task` that can be executed in one `Pod` with a shared context. With this option, users do not have to choose between reusability and performance. However, it is not easy to use because it depends on `Custom Tasks`.

Author: captured.

```

#### Comparable CI/CD Systems

##### 1. Github Actions

[GitHub Actions](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_idstepsuses) allows users to specify `Actions` to run as part of a `Step` in a `Job`. Note that `Action` is the reusable unit of work, and it can contain multiple `Steps`. The `Actions` can execute in an environment with a shared file system, so the users don’t have to choose between reusability and performance.

```yaml
jobs:
  clone-build-push:
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v0.9
      with:
        repo-url: github.com/foo/bar.git
        revision: main
    - uses: actions/kaniko@v0.4
      with:
        image-url: gcr.io/my_app:version
        dockerfile: ./Dockerfile
```

## Proposal

We propose introducing a `StepAction` CRD (i.e. “the work performed by the Step” ) composed of the actionable parts of the current `Step` struct. See the [Step CRD](#stepcrd) section for why we did not pick this name instead.

The `StepAction` will be the reusable and scriptable unit of work that is defined at authoring time and does not contain runtime components.

> **Note**: A `Step` is not reusable, the work ir performs is reusable and referenceable. `Steps` are in-lined in the `Task` definition and either perform work directly or perform a `StepAction`. A `StepAction` cannot be run stand-alone (unlike a `TaskRun` or a `PipelineRun`). It has to be referenced by a `Step`. In other words, a `Step` is not composed of `StepActions` (unlike a `Task` being composed of `Steps` and `Sidecars`). A `Step` is an actionable component, meaning that it has the ability to refer to a `StepAction`. The `Task` author should be able to compose a `Step` using a `StepAction` and provide all the necessary context (or orchestration) to it.` 

Reviewer 3: `s/ir/it`

With this solution, reusable units of work can execute in the same environment with a shared filesystem which improves usability and security. It also eliminates the unnecessary creation of new environments and enables use of local disks to optimize performance.

### StepAction CRD

> The `Step` struct can be split into “actionable” (aka. “work”) and “orchestration” fields. 

Reviewer 3: This is a nit, but we use `struct` here, which makes little sense when talking about API (`struct` is a Go concept). We should use "object" or something.

*The reason for this is, technically the API could be written in Rust or anything*.

# to the TaskRun CRD. No need to fetch it via 
#values since it was written to the old path.
  steps:
    - name: step1
      stepRef: 
        name: myStep
    - name: step2
      stepRef:
        name: myOtherStep
    - name: step3
      image: foo
      script: |
        echo RESULT >> $(results.normalResult.path)
```
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myOtherStep
spec:
  results:
    - name: digest
      description: “Another result”
  image: alpine
  script: |
    echo OTHER-DIGEST >> $(step.results.digest.path)
```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

Currently, `Steps` cannot access `Results` from previous `Steps` via variable interpolation. `Steps` are currently inlined only so `Task` authors can write logic to read the `Result` files written by previous `Steps`. 

However, since the `StepAction` are defined in isolation and are referenced in `Tasks`, it is challenging for the `Task` authors to pass `Results` from one `Step` to another without Tekton providing some API. Therefore, we should enable referencing of `Results` produced by `Steps` via `Parameters` of the subsequent `Steps`. 

> `Task` authors should be able to extract `Results` from previous `Steps` (i.e. written to  `$(step.results.resultName.path)`) using `$(steps.stepName.results.resultName)`. `Results` written to `$(results.resultName.path)` are not referenceable.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure I follow this part. Do we want to enable referencing results from one step to the other ? Only for `StepAction` or any steps ? Any reason to do this instead of passing information through files (aka give the `path` of the Results to a `StepAction` param for it to know what to read) ?

Author: I think any Steps but here, I'm proposing that the reference to that result should be done via `step.results.resultName.path` instead of `result.resultName.path`. During referencing in a later step via `$(steps.StepName.results.resultName)`, the entrypointer does not know which step to reference it from. The reason for this step referencing is because multiple step actions in a Task could produce a result name same thing (e.g. `digest`, which is a common name) but actually need to be different. The Task author putting together these steps should be able to capture their results without the risk of them overwriting each other.

Reviewer: > Do we want to enable referencing results from one step to the other ?

The proposal is to enable referencing results produced by any previous step.

> Only for StepAction or any steps ? 

only for StepAction. `StepAction` is mostly envisioned as a replacement of a `task` with a single step.

>  Any reason to do this instead of passing information through files (aka give the path of the Results to a StepAction param for it to know what to read) ?

It's the same concept, some content is written to a file in a pre-defined location in `/tekton/steps/<step-name>` v/s user specifies their own choice of a path. The users still have a choice to not rely on `results` but create a file as a means of information exchange.

Author: > > Do we want to enable referencing results from one step to the other ?
> 
> The proposal is to enable referencing results produced by any previous step.
> 
Yes, here I intended between steps. That's because when users use `StepActions`, they are using what someone else has already written. When inlining steps, it's a very different behaviour because the same author is writing their custom  script to handle results created by previous steps. 

> > Only for StepAction or any steps ?
> 
> only for StepAction. `StepAction` is mostly envisioned as a replacement of a `task` with a single step.
> 

I don't think we can distinguish between Step and StepAction once the Pod is created because the StepAction is basically converted to an inlined step after it is fetched from the cluster/remote resource. Therefore, this is meant for any Steps.

> > Any reason to do this instead of passing information through files (aka give the path of the Results to a StepAction param for it to know what to read) ?
> 
> It's the same concept, some content is written to a file in a pre-defined location in `/tekton/steps/<step-name>` v/s user specifies their own choice of a path. The users still have a choice to not rely on `results` but create a file as a means of information exchange.

Agreed. The StepAction could totally accept a path to a result file as a param that it could read. However, I think we have the full ability to do this automatically via the entryPointer so it might be best to just provide this as an API sugar so that users don't have to worry about unmarshaling the results. Normally this wouldn't even be required when just inlining the steps since the users have the ability to work around it. Since the StepActions are written in isolation, this is more needed now so that Task authors putting multiple step actions together can rely on passing results to following steps.I think, adding this capability will increase the chances for adoption since it will reduce UX barrier.

Reviewer 3: > Agreed. The StepAction could totally accept a path to a result file as a param that it could read. However, I think we have the full ability to do this automatically via the entryPointer so it might be best to just provide this as an API sugar so that users don't have to worry about unmarshaling the results. Normally this wouldn't even be required when just inlining the steps since the users have the ability to work around it. Since the StepActions are written in isolation, this is more needed now so that Task authors putting multiple step actions together can rely on passing results to following steps.I think, adding this capability will increase the chances for adoption since it will reduce UX barrier.

I am not sure, I follow here. The proposal is to be able to use a `result` as "content" for a parameter value right ? It's not that different from having a parameter that says "read the data from that file", but it is suger 🙃. The "funny" use case would be, some refers to a `results` — so getting the content of it — to write a file with it to pass to the underlying process. That use case would have been better supported with just giving the path (which is still possible so 🧑‍🔧 ).

IMO, this is a "nice to have" feature but is not necessarily a requirement. But 👍🏼 anyway 😝 .

Author: Agreed that this is not a requirement but a nice to have. I think when I initially put together the tasks-in-tasks doc, some readers even explicitly asked if this type of feature would be available.

<tr>
<td>

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1alpha1
kind: StepAction
metadata:
  name: myOtherStep
spec:
  params:
    - name: p1
  image: ...
  script: |
    echo $(params.p1)

```
</td>
</tr>
</table>

#### Workspaces
`Workspace` is an orchestration concept because it’s bound to a `Task`. All the `Steps` in a `Task` can access the Workspaces bound to the `Task`. Occasionally, a `Task` author may want to provide a `Step` exclusive access to some Workspace which they can do via the `Workspaces` field in `Steps`.

The actionable components of a `Step` (i.e. `commands`, `args` and `script`) only require a “path” to a `Workspace` which they refer to via `$(workspaces.someworkspace.path)`. This variable could also be passed in as a string `Parameter` instead. 

When defining an inline `Step`, the `Task` authors have `Workspace` information in context so they can refer to `Workspace` paths directly. However, when referencing a `StepAction`, the `Task` authors should pass paths via `Parameters` because there are no `Workspaces` in `StepAction`.  A `StepAction` should expect to “just work” if all the context is set up appropriately by the `Task` and the correct inputs are passed to it.

> This means that if users are migrating inlined `Steps` to `StepAction`, the rules are slightly different so they need to convert an `Workspace` path into a `Parameter` before using it.

Reviewer 3: How does it "work" with "Isolated workspaces" ? https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/workspaces/#isolating-workspaces-to-specific-steps-or-sidecars

Author: I think in the same way. If I understand correctly, `isolatedWorkspaces` is just telling the controller to only bind the workspace to a specific container. When used in the `actionable` part of the step, a Task author is still doing something like `$(workspaces.workspaceName.path)` or something which could just as easily be passed as a parameter.

Reviewer 3: Good point 👼🏼
